Add support for managing offsets in Connect (#121)
strimzi/proposals: 074-connector-offsets-support.md

# Connector Offsets Support

Update the KafkaConnector resource to allow users to manage offsets

## Current situation

[KIP-875][kip] added first class offsets support to Kafka Connect.
This was done via three new endpoints:
* GET /connectors/{connector}/offsets
* PATCH /connectors/{connector}/offsets
* DELETE /connectors/{connector}/offsets
* PUT /connectors/{connector}/stop

Support for the "stop" endpoint was added via [PR 9095](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/pull/9095).
Currently users that are utilising the KafkaConnector resource cannot make use of the API endpoints for managing offsets.

## Motivation

> Previously if users wanted to list, update or delete offsets for a connector they had to interact with the relevant Kafka topics directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously if users wanted to list, update or delete offsets for a connector they had to interact with the relevant consumer groups for sink connectors or directly write to the Kafka Connect internal offsets topic for source connectors.
```

[KIP-875][kip] adds new endpoints to let the user do this more easily.
There are multiple reasons a user might want to manage offsets, for example (as listed in the KIP):
* Resetting the offsets for a connector while iterating rapidly in a development environment (so that the connector does not have to be renamed each time)
* Viewing the in-memory offsets for source connectors on the cluster in order to recover from accidental deletion of the Connect source offsets topic (this is currently possible with the config topic, and can be a life-saver)
* Monitoring the progress of running connectors on a per-source-partition basis 
* Skipping records that cause issues with a connector and cannot be addressed using existing error-handling features

## Proposal

Strimzi should include mechanisms to let users manage offsets when utilising the KafkaConnector resources.
This proposal suggests different approaches for each action, since they are all slightly different.
In summary:
 - listing offsets via the KafkaConnector status and enabled/disabled through a property
 - altering offsets via a new resource called KafkaConnectorOffsets

>  - deleting offsets via an annotation on the KafkaConnector resource

Author: I hadn't, but presumably it wouldn't be hard to implement, it would just require additional steps for the operator to follow.

For deleting offsets when deleting a connector, I guess the operator would have to do the following steps:
1. stop the connector
2. reset offsets
3. delete the connector

I think we would want a way to disable it, but I wonder if it should be the default behaviour since you can now stop connectors, I'm not sure why you would delete it if you wanted the offsets to be maintained.

For specifying offsets when creating a connector the steps would be:
1. create the connector in a stopped state (we don't currently support this as far as I know but Connect has made it possible)
2. alter the offsets
3. resume the connector
With the current proposal I'm not sure how this would fit in, it would perhaps work better to have the user do it. Although it could be an argument for not having the separate resource, then it would be easier for the operator to do everything.

What do you think?

>  - deleting offsets via an annotation on the KafkaConnector resource

Author: Once you delete the connector, you can't delete, change or list them via the `/offsets` endpoint anymore. You can still do it by directly interacting with the either the consumer group for sink connectors, or the topic for source connectors.

>  - deleting offsets via an annotation on the KafkaConnector resource

Author: Resolving conversation, since I've added this as an option now

### Request/Response from the API endpoints

The request/response used when interacting with the Kafka Connect API is different for source and sink connectors.
This is because sink connectors use regular Kafka offsets, whereas source connectors determine their own structure for offsets.
This difference is reflected in the approaches outlined in this proposal.

Source connector format is:
```
{
  "offsets": [
    {
      "partition": {
        // Connector-defined source partition
      },
      "offset": {
        // Connector-defined source offset
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Sink connector format is:
```
{
  "offsets": [
    {
      "partition": {
        "kafka_topic": // Kafka topic
        "kafka_partition": // Kafka partition
      },
      "offset": {
        "kafka_offset": // Kafka offset
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Listing offsets
The KafkaConnector resource will be updated with a new property to enable the current offsets to be listed in the resource status.

> The new property will be a boolean property called `showOffsets` and default to `false`. It should default to `false` because enabling it requires the operator to do an additional API call every time it reconciles the connector.

Reviewer: `every time it reconciles the connector`, How often is that?

Author: I believe every 2 minutes (similar to the cluster operator), and then if something changes in the KafkaConnector or KafkaConnect CR.

I realise that isn't very often if users are wanting live updates of the offsets. However it's enough to check whether a connector is progressing or not. And if the user is wanting to list offsets to see where a connector got stuck then they only need it to be updated once, since the connector is likely in a failed state.

Author: Is it possible to set up the watch in some way so that it doesn't trigger a reconciliation when the offset part of the status is updated? Or could we perhaps have some configurable timeout value and we only list offsets once the timeout is hit?

Reviewer 2: No, the watch fires at every update. The onUpdate method of the watch gives you the old and new resource, so I guess you could do some filtering there and ignore the watch if only the offsets differ. Btu we do not do anything like that anywhere else, so not sure we want to go that way.

You could probably have some timestamp check and for example update the offsets only if they are over 1 minute old ... we don't do things like that anywhere, but technically it should not be a problem I guess.

That said, none of this would solve the size issues related to the resource status. So we should first figure out if that is a problem or not.

If there are a lot of connectors running in the cluster this is a lot of additional API calls.

When the property is set to `true` the status will include the offsets.

The details in the status will be similar to the format returned by the Connect API:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
#...
status:
  #...
  connectorOffsets:
    lastUpdateTime: "2024-05-21T09:08:58.467712198Z"
    source:
      - partition: "{\"connector-determined-partition\": \"1\"}" # value is a String containing JSON as received from the API

>         offset: "{\"connector-determined-offset\": \"1\"}" # value is a String containing JSON as received from the API

Author: The structure of the partition and offset is determined by the connector you are running, so yeah it's a completely random structure from the POV of Strimzi. There's no way to predetermine what it would be. In terms of size I guess it's limited to at least the size of a Kafka record, since it is stored in Kafka, but otherwise there is no limitation. I think the CM idea is a good alternative, I'll have a look at incorporating that into the proposal.

>         offset: "{\"connector-determined-offset\": \"1\"}" # value is a String containing JSON as received from the API

Reviewer 2: Just keep in mind that CMs still have size limits. their main advantage would be that:
* If needed you can probably compress the JSON
* If you are too big, you would get a nicer error to share in the actual resource status and tell the user to disable the offset collection

But the size limit will still be there, so if there is a concern that it will be a common issue, it might be still not sufficient (I have no idea how much of a niche situation that would be to be honest).

    sink:
      - partition:
          kafkaTopic: "my-topic"
          kafkaPartition: 1
        offset:
          kafkaOffset: 0
```

Notes:
* Only one of the `source` and `sink` properties will be present.

> * The operator will update the `lastUpdateTime` whenever it updates the offsets section of the status.

Author: When you say "to not update it just because of the timestamp" do you mean to not trigger a never-ending loop liked discussed earlier in the proposal?

> * The operator will update the `lastUpdateTime` whenever it updates the offsets section of the status.

Reviewer 2: Yeah. With updating the timestamp even without the offset change just to indicate that at this time these offsets still applied it will be just the timestamp change triggering the loop. So you will have a busy loop even for connectors that are almost idle. That is what I meant I think.

### Altering offsets
To alter offsets a new `KafkaConnectorOffsets` custom resource will be added.
This is similar to the approach used for Cruise Control with `KafkaRebalance`.
This approach is used because the request requires a complex object to specify the desired offsets.

The new resource should look like:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnectorOffsets
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector-offsets
  labels:
    # The strimzi.io/cluster label identifies the KafkaConnect instance
    # in which this connector is running
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-connect-cluster
spec:
  connectorName: my-source-connector
  sourceOffsets:
    - partition: "{\"connector-determined-partition\": \"1\"}" # value is a String containing JSON can be directly passed to the API
      offset: "{\"connector-determined-offset\": \"1\"}" # value is a String containing JSON can be directly passed to the API
  sinkOffsets:
    - partition:
        kafkaTopic: "my-topic"
        kafkaPartition: 1
      offset:
        kafkaOffset: 0
```

Notes:
* Only one of `sourceOffsets` and `sinkOffsets` should be specified.

> * The format matches the format shown in the status when listing offsets so it can be copy pasted here.

Author: I don't follow this question, I meant that I have chosen to use the same format in the offsets CR as the status section of the KafkaConnector CR, just to make it easier for people interacting with the CRs

> * The format matches the format shown in the status when listing offsets so it can be copy pasted here.

Reviewer 2: So, if I got it right, the offset format is defined by the connector. So what happens if I tell Strimzi to set the offsets to a JSON that is not valid for given connector? Are there any validation facilities in Connect for this? Or will Connect just store it in the topic and break the connector?

The logic that it can be copy-pasted is fine. But you still expect the user to change the current status, so there is a pretty big space to create mistakes.

> * The format matches the format shown in the status when listing offsets so it can be copy pasted here.

Reviewer 2: That sounds like a great design :-D. Anyway, not much one can do - maybe we should clarify it in the proposal at least for future reference?

* Both the `offset` properties are optional since the API allows these to be passed as `null` (this resets the offsets for that partition).
* When the offset patch has been completed the status will have a `Ready` condition of `true`.
* If the request fails the status will include the response from the API.
* Strimzi will not attempt to verify that the connector is already stopped, it will rely on the API failing if that is the case.
  This is to simplify the logic and means we don't have to account for what happens if the KafkaConnector spec has been updated but the connector isn't stopped yet.

> ### Resetting offsets

Author: The operator will use the DELETE API, so all partitions and offsets for the connector are reset to 0. So yes if they wanted to reset a single partition they would have to do offset modification

To reset the offsets for a particular connector the user will annotate the KafkaConnector resource with a new annotation: `strimzi.io/offsets-reset=true`.
When the reset has been completed the operator will remove this annotation from the resource.

If the reset fails the operator will add a condition to the KafkaConnector resource called `strimzi.io/offsets-reset` to communicate the failure and remove the annotation.

> Strimzi will shortcut and automatically fail to do the reset if the KafkaConnector resource is not stopped.

Reviewer: Could Strimzi stop the connector if needed?

Author: It could, however the reason I chose not to do that is because I don't think it's best practice for the Strimzi operator to update the spec in the KafkaConnector resource. And it would need to change the `state` to `stopped`

Source connector format is:
```
{
  "offsets": [
    {
      "partition": {
        // Connector-defined source partition
      },
      "offset": {
        // Connector-defined source offset
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Sink connector format is:
```
{
  "offsets": [
    {
      "partition": {
        "kafka_topic": // Kafka topic
        "kafka_partition": // Kafka partition
      },
      "offset": {
        "kafka_offset": // Kafka offset
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### New annotation

All three actions will make use of a new annotation called `strimzi.io/connectorOffsets`.
The possible values will be `list`, `alter` and `reset`.

### Listing offsets

To list the current offsets the user will annotate the KafkaConnector resource with the new annotation `strimzi.io/connectorOffsets` set to `list`.
After the annotation is added, on the next reconciliation the operator will fetch the current offsets and create a Kubernetes ConfigMap containing the JSON response.
If the ConfigMap already exists the operator will replace the data with the updated data.
The operator will then remove the annotation from the KafkaConnector CR.

> If the user wants to see an updated set of offsets they will need to re-annotate the resource.

Author: I state that on line 86 already

The ConfigMap the operator creates will be called `{connector}-offsets`, where `{connector}` is the name of the KafkaConnector CR that was annotated.

> The ConfigMap will contain a single file called `offsets.json` that contains the response received from the GET /connectors/{connector}/offsets endpoint.

Author: The user can see when the ConfigMap was last updated by viewing the `time` in the `managedFields` of the ConfigMap. Do you think that is good enough?

> The ConfigMap will contain a single file called `offsets.json` that contains the response received from the GET /connectors/{connector}/offsets endpoint.

Author: I've changed it to say "entry" instead, but I've left the `.json` file extension to make it clear the format that is expected in the entry.

> The ConfigMap will contain a single file called `offsets.json` that contains the response received from the GET /connectors/{connector}/offsets endpoint.

Reviewer 2: I would think it would be more user friendly to have it somewhere in the data section?

> The KafkaConnector CRD will also be updated to contain a new property called `listOffsetsCM` that when set will override the name of the ConfigMap the operator creates/updates with the endpoint response.

Reviewer 3: Not sure I would use the `CM` to specify it's a ConfigMap (it would come from the CRD spec). Should it be `offsetsList` as well?

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector-offsets
data:
  offsets.json: |
    {
      "offsets": [
        {
          "partition": {
            // Connector-defined source partition
          },
          "offset": {
             // Connector-defined source offset
          }
        }
      ]
    }
```

For a sink connector it might look like:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: my-sink-connector-offsets
data:
  offsets.json: |
    {
      "offsets": [
        {
          "partition": {
            "kafka_topic": "my-topic"
              "kafka_partition": 2
          },
          "offset": {
            "kafka_offset": 4
          }
        }
      ]
    }
```

### Altering offsets

To alter offsets the user will annotate the KafkaConnector resource with the new annotation `strimzi.io/connectorOffsets` set to `alter`.
After the annotation is added, on the next reconciliation the operator will call the PATCH /connectors/{connector}/offsets endpoint to alter the offsets.
Once the patch is complete the operator will then remove the annotation from the KafkaConnector CR.

> By default, the operator will construct the request body from a ConfigMap called `{connector}-offsets`, where `{connector}` is the name of the KafkaConnector CR that was annotated.

Reviewer 2: You browse through your bash history to find the right annotation and use the wrong one? Maybe that is just me, but it happens to me quite often.

> By default, the operator will construct the request body from a ConfigMap called `{connector}-offsets`, where `{connector}` is the name of the KafkaConnector CR that was annotated.

Reviewer 2: In any case, making it optional later ould be easier than making it required later.

This matches the name used in the list operation, so that a user can list offsets, then edit the ConfigMap the operator created, then request the offsets be altered using that same ConfigMap.

The KafkaConnector CRD will also be updated to contain a new property called `alterOffsetsCM` that when set will override the name of the ConfigMap the operator uses to populate the request body.

Notes:
* The format of the request body will be validated to make sure it is valid JSON, but the operator won't perform any further validation, instead relying on the API endpoint to return a reasonable error message.
* If the request fails the KafkaConnector CR status will be updated to include a warning message with the response from the API, e.g.
  ```yaml
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-06-04T08:44:15.913138115Z"
    message: Failed to alter the connector offsets due to "message from endpoint".
    reason: AlterOffsets
    status: "True"
    type: Warning

>   ```

Author: I don't think we should retry unless the user explicitly re-annotates the resource, since there aren't any expected failures that should resolve automatically, however I worry that expecting the user to read the log to spot a failure will result in people not noticing it hasn't worked.

Is it feasible to leave the condition there for a period of time? Or could we use another annotation to communicate that a failure ocurred?

>   ```

Reviewer 2: That is not how the logic works in that case:
1) You remove the annotation or update the status to add the condition
2) That triggers reconciliation
3) This reconciliation doesn't do the operation anymore as the annotation is not there
4) The condition is removed as it is not valid anymore

Doing some time test would IMHO add a lot of complexity to the operator. I think we need either some other way to do this or we should stick with log messages only.

Or we should keep the annotation and retry it. I agree that it seems a bit silly and the retrying alone might not solve much. But maybe it helps the user to realize it doesn't work?

>   ```

Author: Would it work to add the condition but also keep the annotation? That way the first time the annotation is added a new reconciliation would be triggered, however since the error message returned should be identical the second attempt would not change the status of the KafkaConnector. So then after that the reconciliation would just happen every 2 minutes, giving the user time to notice the condition. What do you think @scholzj?

* Strimzi will not attempt to verify that the connector is already stopped, it will rely on the API failing if that is the case.
  This is to simplify the logic and means we don't have to account for what happens if the KafkaConnector spec has been updated but the connector isn't stopped yet.

### Resetting offsets

To reset the offsets for a particular connector the user will annotate the KafkaConnector resource with the new annotation `strimzi.io/connectorOffsets` set to `reset`.
When the operator observes this annotation it will use the DELETE /connectors/{connector}/offsets endpoint to reset all offsets for the connector.
When the reset has been completed the operator will remove this annotation from the resource.

If the reset fails the operator will add a condition to the KafkaConnector resource called `ResetOffsets` to communicate the failure and remove the annotation.

> Strimzi will shortcut and automatically fail to do the reset if the KafkaConnector resource is not stopped.

Author: Good spot, that is because previously the alter was being done in a different resource, not in KafkaConnector CR. We can check ourselves in both cases now, since the state should be correct in the KafkaConnector, so I'll update it to say that in both cases.

The user can update the KafkaConnector to stop the connector and reset the offsets at the same time.
In that case the operator will first stop the connector, and once that API call returns, then it will make the call to reset the offsets.

#### Resetting on delete

It is possible for the operator to help the user in cleaning up resources.
The KafkaConnector CR will have a new property added called `resetOffsetsOnDelete`.
This will be optional and when not present it will default to `false`.
When `resetOffsetsOnDelete` is set to `true` the operator will perform the following steps when it sees a connector needs to be deleted:
1. Stop the connector using the PUT /connectors/{connector}/stop endpoint 
2. Reset offsets using the DELETE /connectors/{connector}/offsets endpoint 
3. Delete the connector the DELETE /connectors/{connector} endpoint

Notes:

> * Steps 1 & 2 are new compared to the existing steps the operator takes when deleting connectors

Reviewer 2: Can we really guarantee this? What if the Connect is not working anymore or is deleted together with the connector etc.?

Author: I think we can give the same level of guarantees as we do with deleting the connector.

For example if Connect isn't working or has been deleted the call to the delete the connector would also fail, so if in future a new Connect cluster was created that re-used the same topics the connector would be started on that Connect cluster automatically, since it wouldn't have been removed from the Connect configs topic.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this is so simple:
* The connector will stay in the Connect topics and be recovered -> but deleted right away if the KafkaConnector CR is missing. So you can probably call it a _very eventual consistency_ :-).
* In your case, the connector will be gone. But the offset will not be reset and later when the Connect cluster is started again, you will not know you were supposed to delete some offsets.

Author: In the proposal I'm suggesting that when we delete the connector we first stop the connector and reset the offsets, so effectively adding those two steps before this line https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/assembly/KafkaConnectAssemblyOperator.java#L488 I'm not following why that would result in the connector being deleted before we can reset the offsets.

However, I have spotted a different problem, which is since we only know to delete the connector because the KafkaConnector CR is missing, we can't use a property on the KafkaConnector CR to tell us whether to reset the offsets first can we 🤔 I think it only works if we always reset the offsets, which as previously discussed we probably don't want

Reviewer 2: > In the proposal I'm suggesting that when we delete the connector we first stop the connector and reset the offsets, so effectively adding those two steps before this line https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/assembly/KafkaConnectAssemblyOperator.java#L488 I'm not following why that would result in the connector being deleted before we can reset the offsets.

This is the normal flow. Sure, you can do it there. But in many of the edge cases, you will not.

> However, I have spotted a different problem, which is since we only know to delete the connector because the KafkaConnector CR is missing, we can't use a property on the KafkaConnector CR to tell us whether to reset the offsets first can we 🤔 I think it only works if we always reset the offsets, which as previously discussed we probably don't want

If I get right what you mean, then check the `connectorEventHandler` in KafkaConnectAssemblyOperator. You should (IIRC) get there the event handled inclusing the deleted CR. So you can see what the settings were. But of course, if the operator misses the watch because it was for example rolling at that time, it will not have it. 

That is the point I'm making here. You cannot easily make it 100% reliable. So is it worth it with the caveat it might not work? Or is it better to leave it to users to do it as combination of steps and take the respnsibility?

}
```

### New annotation

All three actions will make use of a new annotation called `strimzi.io/connectorOffsets`.
The possible values will be `list`, `alter` and `reset`.

### Listing offsets

To list the current offsets the user will annotate the KafkaConnector resource with the new annotation `strimzi.io/connectorOffsets` set to `list`.
After the annotation is added, on the next reconciliation the operator will fetch the current offsets and create a Kubernetes ConfigMap containing the JSON response.
If the ConfigMap already exists the operator will replace the data with the updated data.
The operator will then remove the annotation from the KafkaConnector CR.

If the user wants to see an updated set of offsets they will need to re-annotate the resource.

The name of the ConfigMap the operator creates/updates will be set by the user in the KafkaConnector CR.
The KafkaConnector CRD will be updated to contain a new property called `listOffsets` that must be set for the `strimzi.io/connectorOffsets=list` annotation to take effect.
The structure of the `listOffsets` property will be as below, to allow it to be extended in future if required:

```yaml
listOffsets:
  toConfigMap:

>     name: my-connector-offsets

Reviewer 2: * What if the config map already exists?
* Also, will it have ownerReference attached to the KafkaConnector resource?

Author: I stated higher up that we would overwrite the contents if it existed already. For owner references, I would suggest if the operator creates it we add one, but if it's there already we don't add it.

Reviewer 2: Well, at least until server-side-apply is the main way to do things, you will likely overwrite the CM if it already exists. So keeping any owner references is an additional effort. Also, you can have more of them IIRC.

Author: Do you think we shouldn't add any owner references then?

Reviewer 2: TBH, I do not have a strong opinion ... that is why I was curious about what the plan is :-D. I guess it has both pros and cons. The positive thing is that it will be cleaned up when you delete the connector and clean up all related things. The negative is that it will be deleted with the connector even if you would want to keep it. 🤔 So I'm really not sure what is the best.

    message: Failed to alter the connector offsets due to "message from endpoint".
    reason: ResetOffsets
    status: "True"
    type: Warning
  ```
The operator will leave the annotation on the KafkaConnector resource until either the delete operation succeeds, or the user removes the annotation.
This means the operator will retry the delete on every operation, allowing the condition to remain present for the user to see.

Strimzi will shortcut and automatically fail to do the reset if the KafkaConnector resource does not have it's `state` set as `stopped`.
Similar to if Connect returns on error, the operator will add a condition stating that the operation has failed because the connector is not stopped and therefore offsets cannot be reset, and leave the annotation on the resource.
The user can update the KafkaConnector to stop the connector and reset the offsets at the same time.
In that case the operator will first stop the connector, and once that API call returns, then it will make the call to reset the offsets.

## Affected/not affected projects

This only affects the Connect parts of the cluster-operator.

## Compatibility

> If a `KafkaConnectorOffsets` resource is created against a Kafka Connect version that does not support the APIs, the API calls will fail and the operator will put a suitable message in the status to indicate what has happened.

Reviewer 2: I guess this is not valid anymore because the resource is not used?

Also, the KIP JIRA suggests it is supported from Kafka 3.6.0, in which case it should be supported in all versions we support. Or is there some catch?

Reviewer: Yes I think Kafka 3.6.0 has all the APIs this relies on. 
Kafka 3.5.0 introduced `PUT /connectors/{connector}/pause` and `GET /connectors/{connector}/offsets`. The `PATCH /connectors/{connector}/offsets` and `DELETE /connectors/{connector}/offsets` were added in 3.6.0.
